=== JULIAN GARGIULO (2017) - CHAPTERS 3, 4, 5, 6 ===


--- PAGE 36 ---
2.3. Photodynamic Assembly 35
rounded by a methyl terminated hydrophobic surface. A drop o f colloidal solution
of 800 nm polystyrene spheres is allowed to dry on top of the su bstrate. As the
drop recedes, spontaneous dewetting from hydrophobic doma ins and ﬂow to hy-
drophilic regions occurs, carrying the suspended particle s, which deposit there
as the ﬂuid evaporates. With this method, square regions cove red with colloids
were obtained, as shown in ﬁgure 2.7.d. Also, single particle d epositions in small
wet regions is possible, although, as shown in ﬁgure 2.7.c, t he regulation of the
number of particles is not fully controlled.
2.3 Photodynamic Assembly
In self-assembly methods, NPs organize according to their ther modynamically
most stable conﬁgurations and therefore their versatility t o form arbitrary arrays
is limited. Template-assisted assembly adds ﬂexibility of pattern design, but
requires additional steps than lengthen and complicate the fabrication procedure.
Combination of multiple types of particles is also diﬃcult.
Photodynamic aseembly methods oﬀers the possibility to ove rcome all of these
drawbacks. [ 43] With the help of optical forces, NPs can be trapped, delivered and
ﬁxed at any desired position on a surface. In this way, arbitra ry arrays of particles
can be created without the need of any substrate patterning, previous or after
the assembly process. One of the ﬁrst reports of such an appro ach was published
in 2002 by van Blaaderen et.al.[ 44]. There, they built optical tweezers with a
continuous wave infrared beam ( λ = 1064 nm) focused to a diﬀraction-limited
spot. The tweezers were used to pick up 700 nm silica particle s from a reservoir,
drag them in position and then ﬁx them by shifting the focus of the tweezers
toward the surface, where opposite surface charges are used to immobilize the
particles. In this way patterns like the one shown in ﬁgure 2.8a were created.
The same year, Ito et.al[ 45] also employed a ( λ = 1064nm) continuous wave
beam to trap single 80nm gold NPs and bring them close to a subst rate. There, a
nanosecond pulse of ultraviolet laser ﬁxes the particle to t he surface, by partially
funding it and therefore enlarging the contact area with the surface. Figure 2.8.b
shows a AFM image of a pattern with eight ﬁxed particles. In 2009 , in a work by
Lee et.al.[ 46], controlled deposition of optically trapped high aspect- ratio In 2O3
nanowires was realized by fast-scanning the trapping beam t o rotate the nanowires
and connect two branches of a circuit, as shown in 2.8c. A subs equent annealing

--- PAGE 37 ---
36 2. Assembly of 2D patterns of colloidal nanoparticles onto surfaces
step provided electrical contact between the nanowire and t he electrodes.
(a) (b)
1 0µm
P osition of focused laser beam
and trapped nanowire
1 0µm
(c)
5µm
Figure 2.8: (a) Optical image of a pattern of 700nm radius sili ca particles arranged
on a hcp lattice by optical printing. The arrows indicate two s maller particles that
have been deliveratly incorporated as defects in the patter n. Adapted from [ 44].
(b) AFM image of ﬁxed and patterned gold nanoparticles. Adapted f rom [ 45].
(c) Optical manipulation of a In 2O3 nanowire (left) and placement to connect
two branches of a circuit (right).Adapted from [ 46].
In 2010, Scherer et.al.[ 47] presented an all-optical method to deposit single
Au NPs with a size of 40 nm on glass substrates directly out of sol ution. The
substrates were functionalized with a positive polyelectr olyte, which provided a
repulsive interaction with the positively charged NPs, prev enting their sponta-
neous deposition. The patterning method consisted on trapp ing a particle with
a λ = 817 nm wavelength optical tweezers, at some distance away ( typically 10
µm) of the substrate, as depicted in ﬁgure 2.9a. Then, by manua lly changing the
ﬁne focus on the microscope, the trapped particle could be br ought in contact
and ﬁxed to the surface due to strong van der Waals forces, as d epicted in ﬁgure
(2.9b). After that, a piezoelectric stage was used to move the sample to a given

--- PAGE 38 ---
2.3. Photodynamic Assembly 37
position in the lateral (XY) plane, where the next particle wou ld be ﬁxed. In this
way, patterns were created, as shown in ﬁgures 2.9c and 2.9d.
Figure 2.9: Schematic of single nanoparticle trapping (a) an d deposition (b). (c)
Dark-ﬁeld image of typical pattern used for the determinati on of the precision
of deposition (scale bar 2 µm). (d) “U of C” pattern created from 37 single
nanoparticles (scale bar 5 µm). Figure reproduced from[ 47].
Simultaneously to Scherer’s paper, Urban et.al.[48] demonstrated the pattern-
ing of surfaces with 80 nm Au NPs. The method is similar, but they employed
a laser beam tuned to the particle localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR).
In this way, particles where ﬁxed directly out of the solutio n using the radiation
pressure of light, without any previous stable trapping ste p. This technique is
called optical printing and is extensively reviewed in chapte r 3.
Employing optical forces is not the only way that far-ﬁeld ra diation can allow
patterning of surfaces with colloidal NPs and ﬂexibility of d esign. For exam-
ple, in 2015, Lin et.al.[ 49] employed a laser beam to generate microbubbles at
the interface of a colloidal suspension and a plasmonic subst rate, in a technique
called Bubble-pen lithography. The bubble captures and imm obilizes the parti-
cles on the surface through coordinated actions of Marangoni convection, surface
tension, gas pressure, and substrate adhesion. Moving the be am, they created
particle assemblies and single-particle patterns, as show n in ﬁgures 2.10a and
2.10b. Another family of techniques are known as Optoelectro nic Tweezers[ 50]

--- PAGE 39 ---
38 2. Assembly of 2D patterns of colloidal nanoparticles onto surfaces
m
1 0
a.c.
ITO glass
ITO glass DMD microdisplay
Nitride
n+ a-S i:H
Undoped
a-S i:H
P rojected
image
E lectric f eld
Light-emitting
diode
×1 0
(a) (b)
µ
(c) (d)
Figure 2.10: (a) SEM image of patterned 540 nm PS beads at diﬀer ent laser pow-
ers using Bubble-pen lithography Inset: Magniﬁcation of one of the fabricated
arrays. (b) Patterning of 940 nm PS beads with single-partic le resolution using
bubble-pen lithography. Adapted from[ 49]. (c) Outilne of optoelectronic tweez-
ers. A liquid containing particles is sandwiched between a t ransparent electrode
and a photoconductive electrode. Light patterns from a digi tal projector are im-
aged by an objetive onto the devide. The image, together with an a.c. electrical
bias, generates dielectrophoretic traps in the illuminate d areas. (d) A 4x5 array
of dielectrophoretic traps, each one containing a 20 µm polystyrene particle.
and are outlined in ﬁgure 2.10c. These techniques make use of b oth light and an
electric bias to sculpt a potenial landscape on a photosensi tive substrate. Light
then creates virtual electrodes. The resulting non-unifor m electric ﬁeld exerts
dielectrophoretic forces on particles, that are used to cre ate potential wells. In
this way, particles are trapped on the illuminated areas. Fig ure 2.10d shows an
array of 20 µmpolystyrene beads fabricated through this method.

--- PAGE 40 ---
3
Optical Printing
The aim of this chapter is to present the state of the art of opt ical printing. In sec-
tion 3.1 the ﬁrst paper on optical printing is described, and t herefore the working
principles of the technique are introduced. Then, a summary of relevant progress
during the last years is presented in section 3.2. Finally the open questions and
current challenges of optical printing are discussed in sec tion 3.3.
3.1 Fundamentals of Optical Printing
Optical printing is a simple and versatile method to ﬁx collo idal NPs from suspen-
sion into speciﬁc locations of a substrate using optical for ces, as outlined in ﬁgure
3.1a. It was introduced by a paper by Urban et. al.[ 48] in 2010. Unlike other
approaches, in this work NPs were ﬁxed directly out of a colloi dal suspension
without previous stable 3D trapping. A colloidal suspensio n of NPs, stabilized
by electrostatic repulsion between NPs, was put in contact wi th a substrate.
Spontaneous adsorption of the NPs onto the substrate was avoi ded by preparing
the substrate to be charged with the same sign as the NPs. The fu nctionalization
of the substrate was achieved trough the layer-by-layer ass embly of a monolayer
of a charged polyelectrolyte[ 51].
In addition to the electrostatic repulsion Felect(z), an attractive Lifshitz-van
der Waals force FLvdW (z) acts at short separation distances between the NP
and the substrate. The total interaction FDLV O (z) = Felect(z) + FLvdW (z) is
given by the Derjaguin-Landau-Verwey-Overbeek (DL VO)[52] formalism, by dif-
ferentiation of the interaction energies between a charged sphere and a charged
39

--- PAGE 41 ---
40 3. Optical Printing
(a) (b)
(c)
Figure 3.1: (a) Schematic representation of the optical forc es acting on a NP
during the printing process. (b) Calculated dependence on d istance of the elec-
trostatic, van der Waals, and total forces acting on a positi vely charged Au NP in
the vicinity of the positively charged surface (c) Dark-ﬁel d image of two patterns
made by optical printing single 80nm Au nanoparticles (NPs) . B right spots out
of focus around the pattern are individual NPs freely ﬂoating in the colloidal
suspension. Adapted from [ 48], where details of the calculations are provided.
surface[53].
Felect(z) = πǫmaκ
(
ζ 2
s +ζ 2
p− 2ζpζseκz)
(coth (κz)− 1)
FLvdW (z) = 2Aa3
3z2 (z + 2a)2
(3.1)
where z is the distance of the particle to the surface, a is the particle radius, ζs
andζp are the zeta potential of the surface and the particle respec tively,A is the

--- PAGE 42 ---
3.2. Review of Optical Printing 41
Hamaker constant and k−1 is the thickness of the electric double layer. Figure
3.1b shows the calculation of both forces and the total force . As can be seen, there
is a barrier that prevents deposition of the NPs on the substra te. The basis of
optical printing is overcoming this barrier on speciﬁc loca tions of the substrate by
applying optical forces on the NPs . For this aim, a laser beam i s highly focused
onto the sample plane, generating a small region where axial optical forces are
stronger than the repulsion. There, the NPs can pass the barrier and be so close
to the surface that they get ﬁxed by the attractive van der Waa ls force. When
this happens, it is said that a NPs is printed.
Since optical forces decrease rapidly with the distance to t he focal plane, only
those particles that are close to the focal volume experienc e a force strong enough
to overcome Brownian motion and be guided to the surface. Thi s means that NPs
are free to diﬀuse in the solution until they reach the focal v olume and get printed.
Urban et al. monitored this stchocastic process live using da rk ﬁeld microscopy.
When a NP was printed, they y moved the substrate to another posi tion, where
the following particle should be printed.In this way, surfa ces were patterned with
arbitrary arrays, as shown in ﬁgure 3.1c. Interestingly, no ne of the reddish and
therefore diﬀerent particles present on the NPs solution is p rinted on the arrays,
showing the selectivity of the optical printing.
3.2 Review of Optical Printing
In sections 2.3 and 3.1, two fundamental papers demonstrati ng optical patterning
of surfaces with Au particles were introduced. Urban et.al pap er[48] was from the
Photonics and Optoelectronics group, directed by Prof. Joch en Feldmann in Mu-
nich. Guﬀey et.al.[ 47] paper was from Prof. Norbert Scherer Group in Chicago.
They were both published in the same volume of the journal NanoLetters. Af-
ter these fundamental papers from 2010, the same two groups w ere responsible
for almost all the published papers on the subject, which are described in this
section.
Although the magnitude of optical forces is usually very smal l for sub-micron
particles, the plasmonic properties of metallic nanoparticl es (MNPs) were used to
enhance their interaction with light. On the other hand, the strong dependence
of optical forces on the particle nature can be exploited for sorting and selective
printing of a single type of MNPs out of a mixture.[ 54]. This was already observed

--- PAGE 43 ---
42 3. Optical Printing
on Urban et. al. ﬁrst paper, and then exploited by Huergo et. al. to separate
and study the diﬀerent outputs of a chemical MNPs synthesis. [ 55] For that,
they employed several lasers with wavelengths tuned to local ized surface plasmon
resonance (LSPR) of each type of nanoparticle.
Simultaneos optical printing of multiple NPs in an ordered fas hion is also pos-
sible using spatially modulated light ﬁelds. In the work by Ne dev et.al[56], a laser
beam is split into several beams, creating an optical patter n which allowed the
parallel printing of up to 64 Au NPS, as shown in Figures 3.2.a and 3 .2.b. In an-
other work by Bao et.al.[ 57] ring-shaped and line optical traps were implemented
in order to print Ag NPs, as shown in Figures 3.2.c and 3.2.d. Thes e approaches
have the advantage of being faster. Typically the required ti me for printing the
hole pattern is similar to the characteristic time of printi ng a single particle with
a convectional beam. The pattern can be shifted, allowing th e fast assembly
over larger areas, or it can be modiﬁed at high speed enabling the formation of
complex patterns.
(a) (b) (c) (d)
Figure 3.2: Multiplexed optical printing. (a) Scheme of Opti cal Printing with
multiple laser beams. Adapted from [ 56] (b) ) A dark-ﬁeld image of a square
pattern of 80 nm Au NPs printed with multiple beams (c) Scheme of Optical
Printing with a line trap. Adapted from [ 57]. (d) Optical transmission image of
printed 200 nm Ag NPs array formed using a line trap.
Angular control in the optical printing of Au nanorods was demo nstrated
using a two-color approach.[ 58, 59] A laser beam, not being resonant to the plas-
mon resonances of the nanorods is used for stable trapping of an individual rod.
Optical torque in the trap aligns the rod with the direction o f polarization of
the beam. After that, a second resonant beam is used to print th e rod on the
subtrate, maintaining the orientation. Figure 3.3 shows ori ented arrays of 41 x
114 nm Au rods. Optical printing is not limited to the fabricat ion of devices
based only on colloidal particles. It can also be used to inco rporate a particle
into a speciﬁc position of a complex surface. In the work by Do et.al.[60], optical

--- PAGE 44 ---
3.2. Review of Optical Printing 43
(a) (b) (c)
1µm 1 µm
Figure 3.3: (a) Scheme of two focused beams superimposed for t he printing of
oriented nanorods. (b) and (c) SEM images of an “OX” pattern of printed gold
nanorods with angular control. The orientation of the nanor ods in the two letters
is perpendicular. Figure adapted from [ 59]
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.4: Optical printing on complex surfaces. (a) SEM ima ges of a series of
photonic crystal nanocavities containing optically-prin ted 150 nm gold nanopar-
ticles in controlled positions. Figure adapted from [ 60] (b) Printing and injection
of gold nanoparticles into living CHO cells. Adapted from [ 61]
printing was used to position a 150 nm Au glsNP onto a sub microm eter linear
three-hole defect of a photonic crystal, as shown in ﬁgure 3.4 a. This allowed the
ﬁne tuning of the electromagnetic interaction between the g lsNP and the cavity
mode. In another work by Li et.al.[ 61], Au particles were patterned on the mem-
brane of living CHO cells and, in a former step, injected into th e cell through a
combination of plasmonic heating and optical forces (Figure 3.4b). The survival
rate of the cells was above 70%.

--- PAGE 45 ---
44 3. Optical Printing
3.3 Open challenges
One of the open questions of optical printing concerns its pos itional accuracy.
Despite being an optical method, the positional accuracy of optical printing is
not limited by diﬀraction of light, and individual NPs can be po sitioned with a
precision of several tens of nanometers. In the ﬁrst report b y Urban et.al[ 48], they
measured the precision by printing 80nm Au NPs along a line and d etermining
the position through a Gaussian ﬁt of the dark ﬁeld images, as sh own in ﬁgures
3.5a and 3.5b. They found the average deviation from the line t o be ∼ 50nm.
They also comment that increasing the laser power lead to lar ger deviations.
On the other hand, in the paper by Guﬀey et.al.[ 47] used light out of resonance
(λ = 817nm) to ﬁrst trap and then print 40nm Au particles. The accur acy
of the deposition was found to be around ∼ 100nm, which is larger than the
standard deviation of particle’s position ﬂuctuations withi n the trap∼ 30nm. On
the contrary to Urban paper, they comment that the best precis ion is obtained
for high powers. It remains unclear whether these precision values constitute a
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.5: (a) Dark ﬁeld image of a line of printed Au NPs used to e stimate
printing accuracy. White line is the target line. (b) Detail o f the area marked by
the rectangle in (a) including the results of the 2D Gaussian ﬁt of each particles
used to determine NPs position. Figure adapted from[ 48]
fundamental limit, or they respond to a particular set of exp erimental parameters.
The interaction of NPs with light depends not only on the beam w avelenght,
power and shape but also on the particle composition, size and s hape. Also,
Brownian ﬂuctuations, enhanced by (wavelenght dependent) p lasmonic heating
were proposed as a source of error[ 47, 56]. Understanding the printing mechanism

--- PAGE 46 ---
3.3. Open challenges 45
by unravelling the role of each parameter in the ﬁnal precisi on is the key to achieve
super precise optical printing. In chapter 5 this subject is a ddress.
The other main challenge of Optical Printing concerns its la teral resolution,
understood as the minimum distance at which two particles ca n be printed in a
controlled manner. In diﬀerent experiments the minimum int erparticle distance
for controllably printing has been found to be restricted to a bout 300 nm.[ 62, 63]
This has obstructed the use of optical printing to the fabric ation of plasmoni-
cally coupled structures and circuits of connected NPs. About this subject, in
a paper from 2014, Scherer et. al.[ 57] stated: most reports so far are limited
to relatively large interparticle separation, typically > 1 µm. The same year, in
another work, Feldmann et. al.[ 62] wrote: One of the problems existing for all of
these techniques is an apparently fundamental limitation of the minimal distance
between controllably printed nanoparticles, which could not be reduced much below
300 nm.
In a workaround to this limitation, NPs printed on glass were t ransferred into
a thermoresponsive polymer ﬁlm. Then, the ﬁlm was heated abov e 165 ◦ causing
its contraction and bringing particles closer together.[ 63] The process is depicted
in Figure 3.6a and examples are shown Figure 3.6b. The distance between printed
80nm Au particles was reduced by a factor of 2 . 3. Still after this procedure, the
interparticle distance was limited to about 120 nm.
(a)
(b) (c)
Figure 3.6: Shrink to bring closer. (a) Scheme of the method. Fi rst, Au NPs are
printed on glass, then transferred to a thermoresponsive po lymer ﬁlm by. After
that, the ﬁlm was heated and shrunk, reducing the distance be tween particles.
Dark ﬁeld images of a Au dimer (b) and trimer (c) whose separati on is reduced
from 280 to 120 nm. Insets: SEM images of the shrunk arrays. Figu re adapted
from [ 63]

--- PAGE 47 ---
46 3. Optical Printing
In 2014, Scherer et.al. published the ﬁrst paper where the lat eral resolution
was systematically studied.[ 57] They used the line traps schematized in ﬁgure
3.2c to print the chain patterns of 200 nm Ag NPs shown in ﬁgure 3. 2d, us-
ing a wavelenght of 800 nm. They measured the interparticle se paration inside
the line. The distrubution of separations is shown in 3.7a. Th e interparticle
separation shows a dominant sharp peak at (580 ± 84) nm, which suggest the
presence of a strong repulsive interaction. In the same work t hey studied the
inﬂuence of a previously deposited nanoparticle chain on th e printing of a sub-
sequent parallel chain, as a function of the distance betwee n chains ∆ x. Three
regimes with distinct printing behaviors were observed, as s hown in Figure 3.7.b
. A noninteracting (green shaded) regime, with ∆ x> 600 nm where the printing
is independent of the previous chain. An interacting (yellow ) regime is charac-
terized by deviations of the particles being printed toward distances larger than
expected, for 600 nm > ∆x >300 nm. Last, an unstable regime (pink) occurs
for δx< 300 nm, resulting in the loss of control of the printing proce ss. Some of
the incoming particles are printed onto the existing chain, f orming aggregates.
These results were explained and understood ”in terms of optical binding in-
teractions.” Upon illumination, printed NPs scatter light, which can exert optical
forces on the particles being printed. This mutual interact ion between particles
through light scattering are usually referred to as Optical Binding .[65]. An ex-
tensive review on optical binding can be found in Zemanek et.a l.[66]. Typically,
optical binding forces are long ranged and are both attracti ve and repulsive.
In order to explain their experimental observations, Scher er et.al. calculated
the optical binding forces produced by a pair of illuminated 2 00nm Ag ﬁxed
spheres on a third particle, as shown in ﬁgure 3.7c. The forces lead to a stable
equilibrium position, at a distance of about one wavelength of the ﬁxed particles.
In the same line of thought, in a review from 2014 about optica l printing by the
Feldmann group[62], it is stated that the limitations in the lateral resolutio n of
the technique are ”most likely due to the scattered light from an already printed
nanoparticle interfering with the incident light ﬁeld and creating energetically
favourable positions at large distances from the aﬃxed nanoparticle” .
An alternative explanation of the limited lateral resolutio n was given in 2013
by Urban et.al. Where they wrote that ”because the already printed nanoparticle
is still illuminated by the laser, it can heat up and create convective currents,
disrupting the path of the second nanoparticle.” [63]

--- PAGE 48 ---
3.3. Open challenges 47
(a) (b)
(c)
Figure 3.7: (a) Distance distribution of adjacent Ag NPs inside a chain. The black
curve is a two-peak Gaussian ﬁt to the distribution with mean s and standard de-
viations of (580± 84) nm and (1125± 91) nm for the two peaks, respectively. (b)
Nanoparticle inter chain achieved separation vs set separat ion ∆ x. Inset: repre-
sentative optical images of the deposited arrays. (c) Map of t he force exerted by
the central pair of 200 nm Ag NPs (the gray spheres) on a new 200 nm Ag glsNP
in water illuminated by a plane wave ( λm = 800nm vacuum wavelength). The
polarization is along the x-axis. The direction of each arro w denotes the direction
of the optical force when the third nanoparticle is located a t the midpoint of the
arrow. The colours of the arrows represent the value of elect rodynamic forces as
shown by the scale bar. The dashed circle represents the equi librium position of
the newly added NP. Figure adapted from [ 64]
In chapter 6, the diﬀerent proposed mechanisms are systemat ically studied
and discussed. Understanding the underlying physics is the k ey to design strate-
gies to overcome this impediment and allow the optical print ing of particles at
any arbitrary given inter-particle distance. This would dr amatically expand the
versatility and complexity of devices that can be fabricate d with optical printing.

--- PAGE 49 ---
4
Experimental set-up for
automated multi-color optical
printing
The scope of this section is to describe the experimental set- up that was specif-
ically designed and developed for the experiments in this thes is. The set-up
is detailed in section 4.1. Also, a custom software was develop to control and
automate the measurements, as described in section 4.2
4.1 The set-up
The setup is schematically depicted in Figure 4.1. It consist s of a home-built up-
right optical microscope that combines three diﬀerent tech niques: i) Dark-ﬁeld
imaging in wide ﬁeld. ii) Multicolour sample scanning confo cal microscopy. iii)
Scattering and micro-Raman spectroscopy.
Sample scanning is performed with an XYZ piezoelectric stage (PI P-545) with
nanometer precision and a range of 200 µm in the three axes. Three continuous
wave lasers of 405nm (Cobolt), 532nm (Laser Ventus) and 640n m (MPB) are used
for both printing and as illumination sources for confocal im aging and micro-
spectroscopy. The polarization of each beam is controlled i ndependently using
corresponding λ/ 2 and λ/ 4 waveplates. Beams are spatially ﬁltered using single-
mode optical ﬁbers. They are combined into a common optical p ath towards
the sample using suitable dichroic beam splitters. Each lase r path includes a
mechanic shutter and a neutral density ﬁlter mounted on a mot orized ﬂipper,
48

--- PAGE 50 ---
4.1. The set-up 49
both controlled from the computer. This way the beam can be bl ocked, or its
intensity switched between two values by including or removin g the ﬁlter from the
path. This is useful when the same laser is used for both printi ng and scanning
but diﬀerent intensities are needed for each application. S ince the ﬁlter is placed
before the ﬁber coupling, the beam does not move in the sample plane when the
ﬁlter is included.
Figure 4.1: Scheme of the experimental set-up. M:Mirror, DBS :Dichroic Beam
Splitter, BS:Beam Splitter, NF:Notch Filter, S: Shutter, MNDF: Mo torized Neu-
tral Density Filter. PC:Polarization control, consisting i n a λ/ 2 and a λ/ 4 wave-
plate. Confocal detection boxes are explained in ﬁgure4.2a

--- PAGE 51 ---
50 4. Experimental set-up for automated multi-color optical printing
Dark Field Microscopy
Dark Field microscopy is an imaging technique were the illumi nation is engineered
to enhance image contrast based on scattering. Using an oil-i mmersion dark-ﬁeld
condenser with a numerical aperture NA=1.2-1.4, light from an halogen white
lamp is shaped into a hollow cone and directed towards the samp le. Imaging of
the sample plane was performed using an water-immersion obj ective of NA=1,
and therefore the oblique rays illuminating the sample are no t collected by the
objective and do not contribute to the image. Only light scat tered by objects in
the sample is collected and sent to a camera. This is the reason why images ac-
quired with this technique have usually a dark background wi th bright objects on
it. The microscope has two cameras: A CMOS colour camera (Can on EOS-500D)
and a EM-CCD (Andor Ixon3), both connected to a PC. With these cam eras it is
possible to acquire wide ﬁeld images and videos, as shown in Fi gure 4.3b. Notch
ﬁlters are used to ﬁlter light from the laser beams and avoid da maging of the
cameras.
Confocal scanning imaging of metallic nanoparticles (MNPs)
The conﬁguration for confocal detection is depicted in Figure 4.2.a. A small
circular aperture called pinhole is included in the conjuga ted plane of the sample
plane. Light from the sample plane crosses through the pinho le and is detected
by the photodiode. On the other hand, most of the light coming from an object
in a diﬀerent plane does not cross the pin hole and is blocked. For illumination,
the beam size of the three lasers is chosen to overﬁll the pupi l of the objetive, and
its collimation lens are adjusted to assure that the three bea ms are focused to
its diﬀraction limit on the sample plane. Using notch ﬁlters, elastically scattered
light is separated and sent to respective ampliﬁed photodio des through confocal
detection. The advantage of using notch ﬁlters on this conﬁg uration is two-fold
i) They ﬁlter light from the laser beam, avoiding damage of th e cameras and
ii) Dark ﬁeld detection is barely aﬀected and can be perform s imultaneously to
confocal scanning, because only a small portion of the optic al spectrum is ﬁltered
A computer routine was programmed for synchronously scannin g the sample
and measuring the signal in the photodiode, (see section4.2 ). This way images
can be acquired, using the elastically scattered light of th e laser beams by the
sample. When scanning a MNPs, it is important to note that the co nfocal images
have two contributions: i) Light scattered by the MNP and ii) Li ght reﬂected at

--- PAGE 52 ---
4.1. The set-up 51
Figure 4.2: Confocal Detection. (a) Scheme of the confocal ﬁl tering of the out of
plane light. Light from an object (star) in the Sample Plane ( SP) is collected by
the objective (O) and focused by a convective lens (L) on the c onjugated plane
(CP), where it crosses a pin hole (PH) and is detected by the photo diode (PD).
Light from an object out of plane (circle) is blocked by the PH. (b) Phase θ of
the polarizability as a function of wavelenght, for Ag and Au 60 nm shperes,
calculated using equation 1.8. Confocal images of (c) Ag and ( d) Au 60 nm
spherical nanoparticles (NPs) on glass at λ = 532 nm. Lighter colours indicate
higher intensity.
the water/glass interface. Since the illumination laser is a coherent source, these
two signals can interfere (constructively or destructivel y) at the detector. Let
Ei denote the electric ﬁeld of the illumination beam focused ont o the sample.
Reﬂected light will contribute to the ﬁeld in the detector wi th an amplitude of
Er =rEie−i( π
2 +φ0) withr the eﬀective reﬂection coeﬃcient, −i π
2 the phase shift in
the reﬂection and φ0 a phase associated with optical path from the sample to the

--- PAGE 53 ---
52 4. Experimental set-up for automated multi-color optical printing
detector. Scattered light can be thought as the far ﬁeld radi ation of the induced
dipole at the MNP, therefore proportional to its polarizabil ity α =|α|eiθ. The
scattered ﬁeld at the detector can be written as Esca =sEi =|s|eiφEi, with the
modulus|s|∝| α| and the phase φ = θ +φ0. The intensity measured at the
detector is then given by
Idet =|Er +Esca|2 =E2
i
(
r2 +s2 + 2r|s|cosφrs
)
(4.1)
With φrs = θ− π
2 the relative phase between reﬂected and scattered ﬁeld. It i s
interesting to note that while the ﬁrst (reﬂection) and seco nd (pure scattering)
terms are always positive, the third term (interfence) can b e negative. In certain
conditions, the interference term dominates and MNPs appear dark in confocal
images, with a minimum of intensity in its centre. Recalling equation 1.5, |s|∝
|α| ∝a3 and s2 ∝ a6. This means that for large MNPs the pure scattering
dominates and particles appear bright in the images, while f or smaller particles
the interference term dominates and particles appear dark. The transition size
between bright to dark depends on the value of the reﬂection c oeﬃcient r and
the phase of polarizability θ.
These properties of MNPs can be exploited to detect and locali ze particles
with a weak pure scattering signal: even if |s| is too small, the interference term
is still proportional to |r| and thus comparable to the background.[ 67] For a
given MNP size, transition from bright to dark can also occurs if the wavelength
is changed. Figure 4.2.b shows the phase θ of the polarizability as a function
of wavelenght, for Ag and Au 60 nm shperes, calculated using Kuw ata model
(equation 1.8). Figure 4.2c shows a confocal image of a Ag 60 nm s phere on glass
at λ = 532nm. At this wavelength the phase of the MNP polarizability is close
to zero and therefore destructive interference produces a m inimum of intensity
in the detector and the sphere is visualized as a dark spot on t he image. On the
other hand, if a Au shpere is scanned at the same wavelength, th e phase of the
polarizability is close to π
2 , causing constructive interference in the detector and
the particle is seen as a bright spotin the image, as shown in ﬁ gure 4.2d.
Polarization-resolved scattering spectroscopy
A scheme of the optical set-up for spectrally resolved measu rements is shown in
Figure 4.3a. Light from a white light lamp that is scattered by the sample is col-

--- PAGE 54 ---
4.1. The set-up 53
Figure 4.3: Spectroscopic measurements. (a) Scheme of the ex perimental set-up
O: objective lens. TL:Tube lens. M:Mirror. CM: Convex mirro r. T:Torrete that
allows choosing between two diﬀerent diﬀraction gratings o r a mirror. Π, Π
′
and
Π
′′
are conjugated planes. (b) Dark ﬁeld image of an array of singl e Au nanorods
on glass, taken with the colour camera. (c) If the mirror is ch osen in the torrete,
dark ﬁeld imaging with the black and white camera is possible. The entrance slit
is closed to select a row of particles to be measured. (d) Scat tering spectra of a
single nanorod for diﬀerent polarization angles.
lected with the objective and sent to an spectrometer (Shamr ock 500i-Andor) in
the Czerny-Turner conﬁguration. The spectrometer has a ver y sensitive EMCCD-
camera (Ixon3-Andor) and a motorized torrete that allows cho osing between two
diﬀerent diﬀraction gratings (150 and 1200 lines/mm) and a m irror. If the mir-
ror is chosen, the system is used for imaging. The sample, the e ntrance slit and
the sensor of the camera are in conjugated planes of the optic al system. The
entrance slit is motorized and can be closed to select a regio n of the sample for
the spectroscopic measurement. This is illustrated in ﬁgur e 4.3c. A polarization
control module can be included in the optical path, when pola rization-resolved
measurements are intended. It consists on three optical ele ments: an uncoated
Glan-Thompson polarizer in a rotating mount, a λ
2 achromatic waveplate and a

--- PAGE 55 ---
54 4. Experimental set-up for automated multi-color optical printing
ﬁxed polarizer. The ﬁrst polarizer is employed to select the po larization compo-
nent of the light be measured and ﬁlter out the other componen t. The purpose of
the waveplate and the ﬁxed polarizer is to eliminate artefac ts in the measurement.
Diﬀraction gratings usually have polarization-dependant reﬂection spectra. The
waveplate is used to rotate the polarization of light in such a way that the inci-
dent polarization on the grating is always parallel to its gro oves. This condition
is guaranteed by the last polarizer. It is important to note t hat notch ﬁlters (see
ﬁgure 4.1) are removed from the optical path before measurin g spectra. Figure
4.3.c shows an example of polarization-resolved scatterin g spectra of a single Au
nanorod, with a nominal size of 70x20nm.
Alternatively, the spectrometer can be used to measure inela stic scattering
spectra, such as Raman or ﬂuorescence. To that end, narrow ban d lasers are
used for illumination instead of the white light lamp and sui table notch ﬁlters are
used to avoid reﬂections of the excitation laser from reachi ng the detectors.
4.2 Computer Automation
A custom software was developed in Labview for integrating t he control of in-
struments of the microscope through a common graphical user i nterface. A mul-
tifunction data acquisition device DAQ (National Instrumen t PCIe-6353 ) is used
for acquiring, sending and synchronizing the signals of diﬀ erent instruments. It
is connected to the computer through a PCI-express port and co ntrolled by the
Labview software. The control of the colour Canon camera and the Shamrock
spectrometer was performed independently using software pr ovided by their man-
ufacturers, called EOS Digital SDK and Andor Solis, respecti vely.
The main window of the graphical interface is shown in ﬁgure 4. 4. In the
following, its diﬀerent functionalities are described.
Nanopositioning
The front-screen of the nanopositioning module is shown in ﬁ gure 4.4b. It has
buttons that allow setting and reading the position of the pi ozelectric stage.
The stage has a control driver (PI E-517) that communicates di gitally with the
computer through an USB cable. Motion control is achieved wit h nanometric
resolution and the range of 200 µmon each (X, Y, and Z) axis. Also, it is
possible to read the current position of the stage though cap acitive sensors. The

--- PAGE 56 ---
4.2. Computer Automation 55
(a)
(b) (e)
(d)
(c)
(f)
(g)
Figure 4.4: Graphical interface of the control program. (a) I mage Navigation (b)
Nanopositioning (c) Printing Routine (d) 2D scanning and Time trace (e) Focus
Lock (f) Laser Shutters and ﬁlters (g) Dimers Routine
manufacturer provides a library of Labview programs to cont rol the stage.
Laser Shutters and Filters
The front-screen of the illumination control is shown in Figu re 4.4f. It has but-
tons to control the shutters and motorized ﬂippers. Each las er has a shutter, that
is driven through TTL signals sent by the DAQ and controlled by the program.
Also, neutral density ﬁlters mounted on a motorized ﬂipper ar e included in the
path of the beam. This enables switching the intensity of the l aser beams be-
tween two levels, which is useful to rapidly change between pr inting and scanning
applications.
Timetrace
Timetrace routine is called by the buttons from the main graph ical interface
shown in ﬁgure 4.4d. In order to initialize it, a laser has to be chosen. After
that, an independent control graphical interface is opened, as shown in ﬁgure

--- PAGE 57 ---
56 4. Experimental set-up for automated multi-color optical printing
4.5. The program opens the shutter of the chosen laser and mea sures the signal
on the corresponding photodiode as a function of time (see ﬁg ures4.1 and 4.2a).
The detected signal is proportional to the light reﬂected an d scattered by the
sample, as described by equation 4.1, and is shown online. Th e program has
three stopping options: It can be set to run for a pre-determi ned period of time,
it can be set to run continuously until manually stopped by pr essing a button,
or it can be programmed to stop according to a given condition obtained from
the live analysis of the signal (i.e. change in slope, increme ntation above certain
threshold, etc.). These routines works smoothly for acquisi tion rates up to 1
kHz. Faster acquisitions are possible without live visualiza tion on screen or the
possibility of automated stopping. Due to the slow communica tion speed between
the computer and the DAQ, the response time for automated sto pping is about
10ms.
After the acquisition stops, a ﬁle with the measured data is cr eated. Relevant
additional information such as the acquisition frequency or the date are also
included in the ﬁle.
Figure 4.5: Graphical interface of the Timetrace program.
1D Scanning
This program measures the signal in the photodiode as a funct ion of the position,
while the stage performs a one dimensional back and forth mov ement in one of

--- PAGE 58 ---
4.2. Computer Automation 57
its three axes (x,y or z). A laser beam, an axis, the number of p ixels, the range
of motion and a timebin has to be speciﬁed. According to these p arameters, a
ﬁle with the coordinates of the movement is created and loaded in the driver
of the PI. To ensure linear motion between two positions xstart and xend, the
range of movement is extended ( xmin and xmax) and acceleration ramps with no
acquisition are included in the extended region. The stage h as capacitive sensors
that measure its current position. Using that information th e stage driver has the
capability to send trigger signals when the stage crosses a ch osen position. Those
signals are received by the DAQ, that only acquires data from the photodiode if
the stage is inside the range between xstart and xend.
2D and 3D Scanning
The scanning program user interface is shown in 4.6. It can be used independently
or called from a panel on the main interface as shown in Figure 4 .4d. It is based on
the 1D scanning program. One dimensional back and forth acqu isition is repeated
in one axis, while shifting the position of a second axis betw een consecutive lines.
Two-dimensional images can be acquired, in any combination o f axis (xy, xz or
yz), It also allows the acquisition of a stack of 2D images, fo r example several
xy scans at diﬀerent z positions. Figure 4.6 shows the confoca l measurement of
a single MNP. Left image correspond to data acquired when the s tage is moving
forward, ant right image correspond to the return.
This program also allows the on-line computing of the centre of mass of the
image (as shown in the left-bottom panel). After the acquisit ion stops, a ﬁle with
the measured data and additional relevant information is cr eated.
Image Navigation
In the viewer of Figure 4.4a, the last performed 2D scan is show n. The centre of
the image marks the centre of the objective. It has cursors to choose a position
on the image. A routine permits to move the stage in order to cen tre the beam
at the selected position. In addition, another routine allo ws the computation of
the centre of mass of the image, and subsequent centring of th e beam with that
point. This can be used, per example, to centre a NP with a laser beam.

--- PAGE 59 ---
58 4. Experimental set-up for automated multi-color optical printing
Figure 4.6: Graphical interface of the 2D scanning program.
Focus Lock
This program uses the 1D scan in the z axis. It can be called to s ave a z position or
to return to a previously saved position, using the buttons sh own in Figure 4.4e.
In order to save a certain position, a one dimensional z-scan centred is performed,
with 8 µm range. The resulting intensity proﬁle is saved in a ﬁle. To re turn to
the saved position in a later moment, another z-scan is measu red and the result
is compared with the saved proﬁle through an autocorrelatio n algorithm. That
algorithm provides the z displacement that has to be implemen ted in order to
maximize the correlation between both z-scans. Another poss ibility is to use this
program to measure a one dimensional z-scan intensity proﬁl e and then move to
the position of maximum intensity.
Routines for optical printing individual nanoparticles and dimers
The Printing Routines combines several of the above describ ed programs in or-
der to achieve versatile and automated optical printing and characterization of
individual NPs and dimers of two NPs .
Optical printing of individual NPs is controlled by the butto ns in Figure 4.4.c.
First, a ﬁle with a 3xN matrix including the three coordinates ( x,y,z) of the N

--- PAGE 60 ---
4.2. Computer Automation 59
particles to be printed is loaded. Second, the focus lock pro gram is used to
save the z position. Then, the program moves the stage to the ta rget positions,
automatically prints particles and includes focus correct ion or confocal scans when
required. During the focusing and the scanning steps, the int ensity of the beam is
kept low using the computer-controlled neutral density ﬁlt er, to avoid the printing
of particles. All shutters are closed between steps. The wave length of the beams
employed for printing, focusing or scanning can be independe ntly chosen. Using
these routines it was possible to fabricate patterns of Ag and Au NPs as shown
in ﬁgure 4.7.
Dimers routines are intended to be used after a Printing Routi ne. They are
controlled by the buttons in Figure 4.4.g. Each particle on a p rinted array is
located using the same ﬁle of coordinates, and a second parti cle is printed close
to it, at a ﬁxed distance (∆ x,∆y). This routines includes confocal scans to ﬁnd
the centre of a printed particle, compensation of any focus d rift and additional
confocal scans to characterize the fabricated dimers.

--- PAGE 61 ---
60 4. Experimental set-up for automated multi-color optical printing
Figure 4.7: Patterns of Au and Ag NPs fabricated by optical printi ng on glass
substrates.

--- PAGE 62 ---
5
Optical printing accuracy of
isolated Ag and Au nanoparticles
The strength and direction of the optical forces depend on ma ny parameters: the
particle size, shape and material and the shape and waveleng th of the optical ﬁeld.
To illustrate this, ﬁgure 5.1a shows, as a function of wavelen gth, the maximal axial
and radial forces exerted on Ag and Au nanoparticles (NPs) of the s ame diameter
(60 nm), placed at the centre of a diﬀraction limited focus (NA = 1.0). As can
be seen, the magnitude of optical forces is many times strong er for wavelengths
close to the plasmon resonance of the particle. Also, the rati o between radial
an axial forces dramatically changes with the wavelength. O n resonance, axial
forces dominate, being approximately ten-fold stronger tha n radial forces. On the
contrary, out of the plasmon resonance towards the red regio n, both axial and
radial forces have similar magnitudes. Figures 5.1b-e show r epresentative force
maps for Ag and Au at laser wavelengths on and oﬀ resonance.
Optical printing of gold and silver NPs was proven to be possib le using a
printing wavelength either at plasmon resonance[ 56] or oﬀ-resonance[ 60, 64], but
no detailed study comparing the precision in each case has be en reported. Based
on the ﬁrst measurement by Urban et.al.[ 48] (described in section 3), it has been
accepted as a ‘rule of thumb’ that the printing accuracy of a si ngle particle was
around 50 nm. However, there are still many open questions: Is that accuracy the
best achievable? If so, which is the limiting phenomenon? Is there any inﬂuence
of the wavelength or power of the printing beam? What is the bes t deﬁnition
of precision? The aim of this chapter is to provide a deeper und erstanding of
the subject including a detailed physical description of th e printing process. The
61

--- PAGE 63 ---
62 5. Optical printing accuracy of isolated Ag and Au nanoparticles
employed substrates and particles are described in section 5.1. Section 5.2 deﬁnes
the method to quantify the precision. Then, accuracy limits are tested for Au
and Ag NPs on-resonance (section 5.3) and oﬀ-resonance (sectio n 5.4). Finally,
(in section5.5) a theoretical framework and simulations are used to rationalize
the experimental results.
5.1 Sample preparation
In all the experiments presented in this chapter, Au and Ag NPs we re printed
on glass substrates. Both NPs were citrate coated, and negati vely charged at
neutral pH. In order to avoid spontaneous binding of the metal lic nanoparti-
cles (MNPs), the substrates were surface functionalized with negative charges
employing a layer-by-layer deposition of polyelectrolyte s[51, 68, 69], with Polydi-
allyldimethylammonium chloride (PDDA) Mw = 400000− 500000 as polycation
and sodium polystyrene sulfonate (PSS) as polyanion Mw = 70000 (both from
Sigma-Aldrich). First, glass coverslips were cleaned throug h the folowing steps:
1. Sonication for 10 minutes in Hellmanex (2% v/v)
2. Thorough rinse with MilliQ water.
3. Acetone rinse.
4. Dry in a laboratory oven at 80 ◦C.
5. Plasma cleaning for 3 minutes.
Then, substrate was surface modiﬁed by:
1. Immersion in PDDA solution (1 mg/ml in 0.5M NaCl).
2. Rinsing with MilliQ water.
3. Immersion in PSS solution (1mg/ml in 0.5M NaCl).
4. Rinsing and stored in MilliQ
Citrate-capped gold NPs were purchased from Nanopartz (speci ﬁed diameter
62± 2nm; average diameter determined by FE-SEM 63 nm ± 3 nm). Citrate-
capped silver NPs (speciﬁed diameter 60nm ± 8nm; average diameter determined

--- PAGE 64 ---
5.1. Sample preparation 63
(a)
r [ nm ]
0
250
500
-250
-500
z [ nm ]
500
250
0
750
1000
0
0.01
0.02
F [ pN]
r [ nm ]
0
250
500
-250
-500
z [ nm ]
500
250
0
750
1000
0
0.02
0.04
F [ pN]
(b) Ag 405nm
r [ nm ]
0
250
500
-250
-500
500
250
0
750
1000
0.05
0.15
0.25
F [ pN]
z [ nm ]
r [ nm ]
0
250
500
-250
-500
z [ nm ]
500
250
0
750
1000
0
0.5
1
F [ pN]
(c) Au 532n m
(d) Ag 532nm (e) Au 640n m
400 450 500 550 600 650
0,005
0,01
0,1
1
2
Optical Force [pN]
Wavelenght [nm]
Au |Fz|
Ag |Fz|
Ag |Fr|
Au |Fr|
Figure 5.1: (a) Absolute value of the maximum axial and radial f orce vs wave-
length for 60 nm Ag and Au NPs placed at the centre of a diﬀraction l imited
Gaussian focus with NA = 1.0, and a of P = 1 mW. The three vertical dashed
lines correspond to the printing wavelength used in the expe riments, 405 nm,
532 nm and 640 nm. (b-e) Force maps at P = 1 mW for 60 nm particles. The
arrows denote the direction of the force and its magnitude is c olour coded. All
forces were calculated using equations 1.30 and 1.31.
by FE-SEM 57nm±5nm) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. For simplicity, and
because the small diﬀerence in size is practically irreleva nt for these experiments,
60 nm is used along this chapter as nominal size for both NPs. Or iginal colloids

--- PAGE 65 ---
64 5. Optical printing accuracy of isolated Ag and Au nanoparticles
are diluted to a concentration of C≈ 2. 109 particles
ml using a solution of 1,5 mM
NaCl.
5.2 Determination of printing time and printing
accuracy
The process of optical printing includes Brownian motion an d is therefore stochas-
tic. Consequently, in order to characterize the precision a nd the average printing
time it is necessary to perform the experiment a large number of times with
individual NPs to obtain the representative statistics. To t hat end, the follow-
ing procedure was performed. First, the stage was moved to the target position
(x0,y 0) for the optical printing of a NP. The laser beam was unblocked a nd a the
time-trace of the confocal scattering signal was monitored and analysed on-line
in order to detect the when a NP was printed, as shown in ﬁgure 5. 2e. Printing
events were detected as a step in the scattering signal. The “w aiting time” is
deﬁned as the time interval between the moment the beam was un blocked and
the moment when a printing event was detected. This waiting ti me for optical
printing varies stochastically from one attempt to the othe r, and a characteristic
distribution is shown in 5.2f. As can be seen, is a non-symmetri cal fat-tailed dis-
tribution, i.e. there are events with much longer times than the average, unlike
in a Gaussian distribution. Upon the detection of a printing e vent, the beam is
immediately blocked. Right after that, a confocal scatteri ng image is acquired,
using a lower laser intensity in order to prevent further pri nting events during
scanning. The centre of the image is the target position ( x0,y 0). The centre of
mass of the image was computed and assigned to the position of t he printed par-
ticle (x,y ). The diﬀerence ( δx,δy ) = (x0,y 0)− (x,y ) is the printing error. Using
this approach, errors due to mechanical drift of the microsc ope are negligible,
because acquiring an image takes less than ten seconds and th e microscope drift
is about 5nm/min.
As discussed in section 4.1, the detection of MNPs is interfero metric. Depend-
ing on the scanning wavelength, the particles can appear as b right or dark spots
in the images. For localization purposes, the scanning wave length was always
λ = 405 nm for Ag NPs and λ = 532 nm for Au NPs, independently from the
wavelength used for printing it. In this way, the NPs are detec ted as bright spots
in all cases.

--- PAGE 66 ---
5.2. Determination of printing time and printing accuracy 65
200nm
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
x
y
r
−100 −50 0 50 100−100
−50
0
50
100
9 0 %
6 6 %
3 3 %
(e)
Waiting t im e
0 1 2 3 4
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5Scattering [a.u]
Time [s]
0 25 50 75 100
0
20
40
60
80
100
120Counts
Waiting time [seg]
(f)
x / y / r [nm]
Figure 5.2: (a) Dark ﬁeld image of two square array of optically printed 60 nm Au
NPs (b) Example of a ccattering confocal scan used to determina te the printing
error. (c) Scatter 2D plot where the coordinates of each dot i s the printing error
of a particle. (d) Unidimensional (x and y) and radial (r) cumu lative distribution
functions Φ (e) Timetrace: Elastic scattering signal durin g optical printing of
a NP. The step in the signal correspond to a printing event. (f) Histogram of
waiting times. The median is tm = 4. 7 s
Figure 5.2a show a dark ﬁeld image of an example with 200 NPs print ed in
two square grids for accuracy determination. There are some r eddish NPs which
correspond to non-sphperical or larger particles. After eac h particle was printed,
the error ( δx,δy ) was computed, using a confocal scan as shown in ﬁgure 5.2b.
Particles that were evidently diﬀerent in the dark ﬁeld imag e were removed from

--- PAGE 67 ---
66 5. Optical printing accuracy of isolated Ag and Au nanoparticles
the analysis. An example result of such a measurement is shown in ﬁgure 5.2c,
where the coordinates of all printing errors are included in a 2D scatter plot. The
grey circles represent the areas containing the 33%, 66% and 90% of the particles.
The radius containing the 90% is called R90. An alternative way of visualizing
the same information is through the cumulative distributio n function Φ, as shown
in ﬁgure 5.2d. This function, represents the probability th at a random particle
will be printed within a range from the target coordinate. As a n example, ﬁgure
5.2d shows the unidimensional cumulative distributions fu nctions along the x and
y directions ( φ(x) and φ(y)), obtained from the analysis of the optical printing
of 200 NPs. Both function are similar indicating that the pri nting error is fairly
isotropic. Furthermore, since NPs were printed with linearl y polarized light along
the x axis, printing error is independent of the polarization of t he beam.
The standard deviations, calculated using Sx =
√
1
N
∑ N
i=1(xi−x)2 withx the
mean value and N the number of particles, are Sx = 38. 8 nm and Sy = 37. 6 nm.
In the following sections the precision is characterized us ing the cumulative
distribution function (CDF) for the modulus of the error δr =
√
δx2 +δy 2, as
shown in ﬁgure 5.2.d in the light blue curve. The Root mean squ are error (RMSE)
is deﬁned as
eRM S =
/radicaltp/radicalvertex/radicalvertex√ 1
N
N∑
i=1
(xi−x)2 + (yi−y)2 (5.1)
In the present example, eRM S = 53. 9nm.
5.3 On-resonance Optical Printing
The inﬂuence of laser power on the accuracy of optical printi ng near plasmon
resonance was investigated for Au and Ag 60nm NPs . For this purpo se, the
procedure described in 5.2 was carried out for a range of lase r power levels, using
wavelengths of 405 nm for Ag and 532 nm for Au with a beam waist w0 of
(226± 7) nm and (265 ± 5) nm respectively. Example grids are shown in ﬁgure
5.3a and 5.3b. The results were similar for both materials. At lower powers,
printing events become rare; the optical forces are too weak to overcome the
electrostatic repulsion. A maximum waiting time of two minu tes before moving
to the next position was set, and that is the reason why there a re holes in the grids
at the lowest powers. If the laser power is decreased below a c ertain threshold, no
particle is printed. The threshold power Pth was deﬁned as the minimum power

--- PAGE 68 ---
5.3. On-resonance Optical Printing 67
Figure 5.3: On-resonance printing: Example arrays of (a) Au an d (b) Ag 60nm
NPs fabricated through on-resonance optical printing at diﬀe rent laser powers.
Figure 5.4: On-resonance printing: (a) Radial CDF for Ag NPs at d iﬀerent
powers. (b) Radial CDF for Au NPs at diﬀerent powers.

--- PAGE 69 ---
68 5. Optical printing accuracy of isolated Ag and Au nanoparticles
for which there is at least one printing event in ten minutes. It was found to be
Pth = (0. 55± 0. 05) mW for Ag and Pth = (1± 0. 05) mW for Au.
On the other hand, at high powers the number of defective NPs increases.
Those are the particles appearing with diﬀerent colours in t he dark-ﬁeld images
of the example grids. This could be caused by the lost of selec tivity as the optical
forces became strong enough to print other types of NPs from th e suspension.
Other possibility is that the particles can be reshaped or mo diﬁed by the high
temperatures and electric ﬁelds reached[ 70] (further discussion on controlled re-
shaping is presented in chapter 7). The power was increased u ntil the defective
NPs outnumbered the regular NPs .
0,0 0,5 1,0 1,5 2,0 2,5 3,0 3,5 4,0 4,5 5,0
0
50
100
150
200
250
Laser Power [mW]
eRMS [nm]
Ag@405nm
Au@532nm
0,5 1,0 1,5 2,0 2,5 3,0 3,5 4,0 4,5 5,0
0,5
1
5
10
20
Median waiting time [s]
Laser Power [mW]
(a) (b)
Ag@405nm
Au@532nm
Figure 5.5: (a) On-resonance waiting time (log scale) as func tion of laser power.
(b) eRM SE as a function of laser power for both materials. Pink: Ag at λ =
405 nm. Blue: Au at λ = 532 nm.
Figures 5.4a and 5.4b show the Φ for six diﬀerent laser powers. Clearly, the
precision of optical printing gets worse as the laser power i ncreases, for both
NPs when the light used is tuned to their respective localized surface plasmon
resonance (LSPR). Figure 5.5b summarizes this observation d isplaying theeRM SE
as a function of the power for both materials. The precision i mprove as the laser
powers is decreased, reaching values of around 50 nm, well be low the beam waist
size. However, a slightly larger error eRM SE is found for the laser power closes to
the minimum threshold.
It is also interesting to investigate whether the waiting ti mes for printing
depend on laser power. 5.5a shows the median waiting times for the printing of
Ag and Au NPs as a function of laser power. In both cases the waitin g time
increases as the laser power reduces, and they become drasti cally longer as the

--- PAGE 70 ---
5.4. Oﬀ-resonance Optical Printing 69
threshold approaches.
5.4 Oﬀ-resonance Optical Printing
(c) Ag
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
0,00
0,25
0,50
0,75
1,00
CDF Φ
r [nm]
3.5 mW
4.5 mW
7.0 mW
9.4 mW
20.0 mW
23.5 mW
(d) Au
0 50 100 150 200 250 300
0,00
0,25
0,50
0,75
1,00
CDF Φ
r [nm]
5.2 mW
6.1 mW
8,3 mW
10,9 mW
λ= 532nm λ= 640nm
Figure 5.6: Oﬀ-resonance printing: (a) Radial CDF for Ag NPs at λ = 532 nm
and diﬀerent powers. (c) Radial CDF for Au NPs at λ = 640 nm and diﬀerent
powers.
Median waiting time [s]
0 5 10 15 20 25
1
10
100
Ag@532nm
Au@640nm
0 5 10 15 20 25
0
50
100
150
200
250
eRMS [nm]
Laser Power [mW] Laser Power [mW]
(a) (b)
Ag@532nm
Au@640nm
Figure 5.7: (a) Oﬀ-resonance waiting time (log scale) as func tion of laser power.
Black:Ag at λ = 405 nm. Red: Au at λ = 532 nm.
In order to print NPs out of resonance, lasers of 532 nm for Ag and 640nm for
Au were used, with a beam waist w0 of (265±5)nm and (319±6)nm respectively.
As expected from the smaller absorption and scattering cross sections involved,
higher laser powers are required for optical printing. The t hreshold powers were
Pth = 3. 5 mW for Ag and Pth = (5± 0. 5) mW for Au.

--- PAGE 71 ---
70 5. Optical printing accuracy of isolated Ag and Au nanoparticles
On resonance, the automatic detection of printing events is done with the
printing beam itself. This can be diﬃcult when working oﬀ-res onance, due to
destructive interference that occurs at the detector (disc ussed in section4.1). For
this reason, a detection laser was superimposed to the printi ng beam, resonant
with plasmon of the particle. The intensity of the detection laser was kept as
low as possible, and in all cases the force exerted by this bea m was below 10%
of the force exerted by the printing beam. An additional diﬃcu lty for automated
detection is that, due to the high radial to axial force ratio present when using
oﬀ-resonance light, particles can be trapped in the confoca l volume and raise the
detection signal, but without being printed on the surface. For this reason an
additional conﬁrmation step was included. After a NP was detec ted, both the
printing and the detection beams were blocked for a time inte rval of one second.
Then, the presence of the NP was interrogated with the detect ion beam alone,
in order to check whether the particle was ﬁxed on the surface . If the NP was
not ﬁxed, the printing beam was unblocked and the process was repeated until a
NP was eﬀectively printed. Once the printing was conﬁrmed, the position of the
printed NP and the printing error were determined.
Figure 5.6 shows the Φ( r) obtained from the oﬀ-resonance printing of 200
NPs at diﬀerent laser powers. Remarkably, the precision of op tical printing oﬀ-
resonance is practically independent of the laser power used. Although the preci-
sion in this case is a little worse than the best precision att ained in resonance, it
remains well below the diﬀraction limit. The value of erms in each case is roughly
2.75 times smaller than the beam waist, namely 90 nm for Ag and 1 15 nm for
Au NPs (Figure 5.7).
The waiting times are shown in ﬁgure 5.7a. They are in general larger than
ones observed on resonance, but follow the same decreasing t endency with in-
creasing power.
5.5 Discussion of the Optical Printing mecha-
nism
In this section a physical description of the process of opti cal printing of NPs
is provided, aiming to explain the experimental observatio ns described in the
previous sections. First, the measured waiting times are di scussed in subsection
5.5.1. Then, the printing precision is addressed in subsect ion 5.5.2. Part of

--- PAGE 72 ---
5.5. Discussion of the Optical Printing mechanism 71
the results presented here emerged from fruitful discussio ns with Luk´ aˇ s Chv´ atal
and Pavel Zem´ anek from the Group of Optical Micro-manipulat ion Techniques
(OMITEC) at the Institute of Scientiﬁc Instruments of the Cze ch Academy of
Sciences (Brno, Czech Republic). Subsection 5.5.1 include calculations performed
by Lukas Chvatal, as indicated.
5.5.1 Waiting time for optical printing
During the optical printing process, the NPs may experience tw o kinds of mo-
tion: i) Deterministic motion driven by the external optica l ﬁeld or ii) Diﬀusive
or Brownian motion. Below, the two types of motion are descri bed and their
contribution to the observed waiting times is discussed.
Deterministic motion: Fluid ﬂows can be classiﬁed according to the Reynolds
number[71]
Re = ρ ˜V ˜L
µ (5.2)
where ˜V is a characteristic velocity, ˜L a characteristic length, µ the dynamic
viscosity and ρ the ﬂuid density. The Reynolds number estimates the ratio be-
tween inertial and viscous forces. If Re≪ 1, viscous forces dominate. In the
present system, using ˜L = 60nm for the sphere diameter, µ = 10 −3Pa s and
ρ = 10 −3 kg
m3 for the water viscosity and density, respectively, one obtai ns a value
of Re≈ ˜V 6. 10−2 s
m which is ≪ 1 for any physically meaningful velocity of the
NPs during the optical printing process. The movement of a part icle in a ﬂow
with such a small Reynolds number is overdamped. This means that the velocity
of the particle is proportional to the applied force, accord ing to Stokes equation
V (⃗ r) = F (⃗ r)γ (5.3)
withγ = 1
6πµa the Stokes mobility and a the particle radius. For the NPs moving
in water driven by an external optical ﬁeld Fop(r) we can assign to each point a
characteristic time for deterministic motion given by
˜τd (⃗ r) =
˜L
|V (⃗ r)| =
˜L
γ|Fop (⃗ r)| (5.4)

--- PAGE 73 ---
72 5. Optical printing accuracy of isolated Ag and Au nanoparticles
Equation 5.3 states the proportionality between the force a nd the velocity. This
means that the force ﬁeld lines can be interpreted as velocit y lines or trajectories.
Given an initial position ⃗ r, the trajectory toward the surface is determined by
the optical forces. This enables the calculation of a “time o f ﬂight” τ (⃗ r), given
by the path integral on the trajectory from that position ⃗ rto the substrate
τ (⃗ r) =
∫ z=0
⃗ r
dl
γ|Fop(r)| (5.5)
Figure 5.8 shows the time of ﬂight τ for Au particles near the Gaussian focus of
a beam of λ = 532 nm, with a waist of w0 = 265 nm a power of P = 1 mW,
typical parameters of optical printing on resonance. Since t he beam has axial
symmetry, it is shown in polar coordinates. The motion of the Au NPs under
0
r [ nm ]
400 800
2000
1500
1000
500
0 −4
−3.5
−3
−2.5
−2
−1.5
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
-400-800
Tim e of flight to surface. (log 10[ s] )
Au λ= 532nm  P= 1m W
z[ nm ]
Figure 5.8: Time of ﬂight for deterministic motion calculate d using equation 5.5
for Au NPs with a laser beam of λ = 532 nm, a waist w0 = 265 nm and power
of P = 1 mW. Values on this ﬁgure were calculated by Lukas Chvatal fr om
OMITEC.
these conditions is much faster than the observed waiting ti mes. For example,
a particle starting 2 µm away from the surface at the center of the beam has a
time of ﬂy of ≈ 10ms, while the observed waiting times are typically in the or der
of the seconds. Therefore, the optical printing process can n ot be explained only

--- PAGE 74 ---
5.5. Discussion of the Optical Printing mechanism 73
in terms of deterministic motion and Brownian motion must be involved as well.
Free diﬀusive Brownian motion: The mean square displacement of a
freely diﬀusing particle three dimensions in a time t is [ 72]
∆r2 = 6Dt = 6γkBTt (5.6)
With D = γkBT the diﬀusion coeﬃcient, γ = 1
6πµa the Stokes mobility, kB the
Boltzmann constant and T the temperature. Let denote ˜ τf the characteristic
time for which a particle diﬀuses over some characteristic d istance ˜L.
˜τf =
˜L2
6kBTγ (5.7)
Considering a NP with diameter of 60 nm, in water and at 25 ◦C, the time needed
by the NP to diﬀuse over a length equal to its own radius is ˜ τf≈ 6. 10−5s. If this
time is much shorter than its deterministic counterpart, the n the motion of the
NP is dominated by free diﬀusion (pure Brownian motion). One wa y to analyse
these kind of situations is by means of the adimensional Pecl et number:
Pe (⃗ r) = τf
τd (⃗ r) =
˜L|Fop (⃗ r)|
2kBT (5.8)
If the P´ eclet number is much lower (higher) than unity, diﬀusion is dominant (neg-
ligible). It will be assumned that the characteristic time f or Brownian motion
˜τf is uniform in space; i.e. there is no inﬂuence of the surface or high temper-
ature increases induced by the laser on the diﬀusion. The char acteristic time
for directed motion τd depends on position according to the optical force ﬁeld.
Using the P´ eclet number, a “capture volume” Vc can be deﬁned, understood as
the region of space where the optical forces are stronger tha n Brownian motion.
This volume and its boundary surface Sc are deﬁned as
Vc ={⃗ r:P (⃗ r)> 1}
Sc ={⃗ r:P (⃗ r) = 1}
(5.9)
Figure 5.9 shows the surfaces Sc for Au NPs on-resonance and for Ag NPs oﬀ-
resonance for diﬀerent power levels. In both cases a Gaussia n beam of λ =
532 nm with a waist of w0 = 265 nm was used. The capture volume increases

--- PAGE 75 ---
74 5. Optical printing accuracy of isolated Ag and Au nanoparticles
−300 0 300
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
2 mW
1.2m W
1.5m W
2 mW
3 mW
4 mW
5 mW
6 mW
7 mW
8 mW
9 m w
10 m w
6 mW
8 mW
10 mW
15 mW
20 mW
30 mW
35 mW
40 mW
45 mW
50 mW
0
(a) Au (b) Ag
z [ nm ]
z [ nm ]
600−600
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
−300 0 300 600−600
r [ nm ]r [ nm ]
λ= 532nm
25 mW
λ= 532nm
Figure 5.9: Capture surfaces Sc ofPe = 1 for diﬀerent powers levels, calculated at
λ = 532 nm for (a) on-resonance Au and (b) oﬀ-resonance Ag 60 nm sph eres. This
surfaces can be understood as the transition between Browni an and deterministic
motion. A beam waist of w0 = 265 nm was used. Values on this ﬁgure were
calculated by Lukas Chvatal from OMITEC.
for higher powers. If a particle is inside this volume, it is dr iven towards the
substrate by the optical force ﬁeld. This motion is fast. For example, a Au NP
illuminated at λ = 532 nm and P = 1, 5 mW that enters the capture volume
from the axial axis (r=0), will require ≃ 1ms to reach the surface. This time is
negligible compared to observed waiting times, that are typ ically of a few seconds.
Therefore, it can be concluded that the main contribution to t he waiting time
is given by the Brownian motion of the particles outside the c apture volume,
i.e. the waiting times shown in ﬁgures 5.5a and 5.5b correspo nd to the time
that the closest particle to Vc requires to reach Sc by diﬀusive motion. Since it
depends on the initial position of the particle and its rando m motion, the waiting
time is a stochastic variable with values varying from one ev ent to an other.
The fact that the capture volume increases with the power exp lains why the
waiting time decreases. It is important to note that the parti cle concentration
is C ≈ 2. 109 N P s
ml , which correspond to approximately 5 . 10−4 particles in the

--- PAGE 76 ---
5.5. Discussion of the Optical Printing mechanism 75
capture volume Vc(1. 2 mW ) for Au in resonance. This means that when the
printing beam is turned on, the most likely situation is the c apture volume to be
empty.
This conclusion is further supported by estimating the orde r of magnitude of
diﬀusive times. The concentration of particles is C ≃ 2. 109 N P s
ml which means
that, on average, there is a particle every ≃ 500 µm3. This value is typically
much larger than the capture volumes. For example, the captu re volume for Au
NPs at P = 1. 5 mW is Vc(1. 5 mW )≃ 0. 05µm3. The average distance between
a particle and the capture volume is can then be estimated by ≃ 8 µm. The
required time for a particle of 60 nm to diﬀuse over that dista nce is, according to
equation 5.7, τ≃ 1, 4s, which is of the same order of magnitude of the observed
waiting times.
5.5.2 Printing error
The width of the capture volume is comparable to the beam wais t w0, i.e. a few
hundreds of nanometers, as can be seen from ﬁgure 5.9. However , the observed
printing error or mean square error of the printed NPs are smal ler, and particles
can be printed with a position accuracy of up to ≃ 50nm. In order to explain this,
it is important to recall that there is an electrostatic barr ier close to the surface,
as introduced in section 3.1. Therefore, the necessary cond ition for printing a
particle in a position r on the surface, is that the axial optical force F z
op(r,z )
fulﬁls the condition
|F z
op| (r,z = 0) >F th (5.10)
WhereFth =max{FDLV O} is the threshold force, deﬁned as the maximum of the
surface repulsion, given by DL VO theory. According to this th eory, the range of
action of the repulsion is limited to distances between the s urface and the particle
of just a few nanometers. Considering that this distances are s hort compared to
the typical variation lengths of the optical ﬁelds, Fop in 5.10 was evaluated at the
surface plane z = 0 with negligible error.
The existence of a threshold force is consistent with the exp erimental observa-
tion of a threshold laser power Pth, below which it is impossible to print a particle.
In fact, the value of the electrostatic threshold force Fth can be estimated from

--- PAGE 77 ---
76 5. Optical printing accuracy of isolated Ag and Au nanoparticles
the experimentally observed Pth though
Fth =max
[
F z
op (Pth)
]
(5.11)
If a the laser power is above the threshold power, it is capabl e of generating op-
tical forces stronger than the surface repulsion Fth. Hovewer, since optical forces
decrease rapidly for increasing distance from their maxima , the region where they
are stronger than the repulsion is limited. For each laser po wer, a “printing ra-
dius” Rp (P ) is deﬁned, as the radius of the region in the focal plane wher e the
axial optical force is above the threshold, i.e. the radius w ithin the axial optical
force fulﬁls condition 5.10. Figure 5.10 shows the axial optic al force F z
op (r,z = 0)
-400 -300 -200 -100 0 100 200 300 400
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
F
z
op [pN]
r [nm]
1.2m W
2 mW
3 mW
4 mW
5 mW
Rp(2m W)
Au λ= 532nm
Figure 5.10: Axial optical force F z
op at the substrate plane (z=0) as a function
of the radial position, for Au NPs at λ = 532nm and diﬀerent beam powers.
The blue horizontal line indicates the threshold repulsive electostatic barrier Fth.
The printing radius Rp is depicted at P = 2mW . The threshold force Fth was
calculated using equations 5.11, 1.30 and 1.31 and the exper imental value of Pth.
for diﬀerent beam powers, only for the region within the prin ting radius Rp (P ),
calculated for Au NPs at λ = 532 nm. The value for Rp (P = 2 mW) is depicted.
Figure 5.11 shows Rp (solid lines) as a function of the laser power, for 60 nm Au
and Ag NPs at the wavelengths experimentally tested in previou s sections. Rp
increases steeply close to the threshold power and diminish es its growth rate as

--- PAGE 78 ---
5.5. Discussion of the Optical Printing mechanism 77
the laser power increases..
It is interesting to compare the calculated printing radius Rp with the experi-
mental observations of previous sections. For that, we incl uded in ﬁgure 5.11 the
observed R90 for each condition. This is, the radius containing the 90% of the
localizations of printed particles, as deﬁned in section 5.2 . The general agreement
between Rp and R90 for the on-resonance case is remarkable, specially conside r-
ing that the calculations included no free parameter, which is a strong indication
that the proposed physical picture is correct in essence. Th ere is a systematic
deviation at the highest laser powers, where the observed pr inting error R90 is
larger than Rp. This can be due to the considerable temperature increase th at
the particles experience at those high powers, which can be a s large as hundreds
of degrees, distorting (reducing) the repulsion.
At this point, it becomes clear why is not possible to increas e the optical
printing precision simply by reducing the laser power.
In theory, one could set the laser power just above the thresh old in order to set
a small printing radius Rp and thus highly accurate printing. However, it must be
noted that close to the threshold, the dependence of Rp with the printing power
is extremely sharp. For example, dRp
dP (Pth) = 2 nm
µW for Au at λ = 532 nm, which
means that a power sweep with at least 10 µm of resolution is needed to ﬁnd
such a power. Also, ﬂuctuations of the power should be kept smal ler than≈ 10
umW or equivalently≈ 1%. Even though such stability levels are experimentally
possible, the value of the threshold Pth would also be aﬀected by other factors
like: i) Small variations in the particle size can change the exact value of the
optical force. ii) Inhomogeneities in the surface charge of the particles and/or the
substrate can change the exact value of the electrostatic ba rrier from one printing
event to another.In practice, using laser powers very close to the threshold seems
to lead to worse accuracy, as shown in ﬁgure 5.11. At this leve ls of laser power,
printing events become rare, and it is possible that the expe riment ends up biased
by printing events on surface regions where the charge densi ty is slightly smaller.
A more detailed discussion is open by considering the traject ories of the NPs
. As discussed is subsection 5.5.1, once a particle enters the capture volume, it
is dragged to the substrate by the optical force, following a deterministic trajec-
tory. If the end position of the trajectory is inside the prin ting radius Rp, the
electrostatic barrier can be overcame and the particle is pr inted. However, there
are trajectories for which the end position on the substrate i s outside the printing

--- PAGE 79 ---
78 5. Optical printing accuracy of isolated Ag and Au nanoparticles
0 5 10 15 20 25
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Laser Power [mW]
0 1 2 3 4 5
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Laser Power [mW]
(a) On-resonance
Printing Radius Rp [nm]
Printing Radius Rp [nm]
Ag@405nm
Au@532nm
Ag@532nm
Au@640nm
(b) Off-resonance
Figure 5.11: Solid lines: Theoretical printing radius lmax as a function of printing
power for 60 nm Au and Ag NPs on-resonance (a) and oﬀ-resonance (b ). Squares:
Experimental root mean square error eRM S. Pink: Ag at λ = 405 nm. Blue: Au
at λ = 532 nm. Black: Ag at λ = 532 nm. Red: Au at λ = 640 nm.
radius. Those NPs cannot reach the substrate. Their faith may be determined
by radial forces that tend to direct them towards the beam cen ter. In this case
they may cross Rp and be printed. Alternatively, Brownian motion may lead
them outside the capture volume. In all cases, the ﬁnal posit ion of the printed
particle is in the region inside Rp. Figure 5.12 show trajectories calculated for
Au 60 nm NPs at diﬀerent powers and wavelengths, but only those tr ajectories
that end inside the printing radius Rp are plotted.
Figure 5.12a shows the situation for particles on-resonance and a printing
power just above the threshold. Since radial forces on-reso nance are weak, tra-
jectories are mainly axial. The black box at the substrate le vel correspond to the
printing radius Rp. Since it is small, there are not many trajectories that lead s to
printing. If the power is increased, the printing radius is l arger and more trajec-
tories become available, painted in pink in ﬁgure 5.12b. Par ticles with an initial
position inside the black trajectories will continue to be p rinted inside the black
box. On the other hand, a particle with an initial position in the pink region or
outside any trajectory will eventually be printed in the pink box. The amount of
particles on each box, i.e. the ﬁnal distribution of printin g errors, will depend on
the spatial distribution of probability for the initial pos ition of particles. Further
increasing the printing power will provide more printing tr ajectories, as shown in
light blue in ﬁgure 5.12c.

--- PAGE 80 ---
5.5. Discussion of the Optical Printing mechanism 79
Figure 5.12: Calculated trajectories for 60nm Au NPs at diﬀeren t powers and
wavelengths. Only the trajectories that end inside the prin ting radius Rp are
shown. Pink and light blue lines are those trajectories that become available
when increasing the power with respect to the lower value. Co loured boxed at
z = 0 depict the ﬁnal position of the trajectories. The added si ze of the boxes
correspond to Rp.
A diﬀerent scenario takes place when optical printing is perf ormed with light
oﬀ-resonance. First, Rp is no longer a good representation of the printing accu-
racy, as can be seen in ﬁgure 5.11b. Second, completely diﬀer ent NP trajctories
are involved because radial and axial forces are comparable i n this case. Figure
5.12d shows the printing trajectories for oﬀ-resonant prin ting at a beam power
above the threshold. Therefore, when the printing conditio n is fulﬁlled (equation
5.10), the radial forces are strong enough to drive NPs towards the substrate

--- PAGE 81 ---
80 5. Optical printing accuracy of isolated Ag and Au nanoparticles
from a large portion of the 2 Π solid angle. The probability th at a NP will diﬀuse
into a position from which can be printed is high. The printin g radius is again
depicted with a black box. If the power is increased, new print ing trajectories
become available, as shown in pink in 5.12e. However, those tr ajectories cover a
very small region of space and the probability that particle w ill diﬀuse into such
an initial position is relatively small. Therefore, even th oughRp is increased, the
ﬁnal distribution of printed NPs will not be modiﬁed, i.e. R90 will not increase.
This explains the independence of the printing error with la ser power observed
oﬀ resonance.

--- PAGE 82 ---
6
Connecting Metallic
Nanoparticles by Optical
Printing
“Ya las vamos a hacer brillar pibe”
– Emiliano Cort´ es,2014
One of the most important open questions of Optical Printing c oncerns its
resolution, understood as the minimum distance at which two particles can be
printed in a controlled manner. As discussed in section 3.3, it has been shown in
diﬀerent experiments that nanoparticles (NPs) cannot be pri nted closer to each
other than 300 nm. This apparently fundamental limitation h as obstructed the
use of optical printing for the fabrication of plasmonicall y coupled structures and
circuits of connected NPs. In this chapter, the optical print ing of nearby NPs
is systematically studied. The aim is to understand the under lying physics in
order to ﬁnd strategies to overcome these impediments and al low the printing of
arbitrary particles at any given inter-particle distance.
6.1 Fabrication and characterization of dimers
Optical printing resolution was systematically studied by fabricating dimers of
two identical or diﬀerent NPs and a wide range of target interp article distances.
First, an extended grid of well separated NPs (at least 2 µm from each other) was
fabricated by optical printing. Then, each NP on the array is l ocalized and optical
81

--- PAGE 83 ---
82 6. Connecting Metallic Nanoparticles by Optical Printing
Figure 6.1: (a) Dark ﬁeld image of an array of Au 60nm NPs printed a t λ =
532 nm and P = 1. 2 mW (b) Dark ﬁeld image of the same array after a second
particle was printed. (c) Deﬁnition of the set point d and the achieved dexp. (d)
Confocal scan of the particle marked with a white box, acquir ed at λ = 532 nm
and P = 0, 4 mW before the printing of the second particle. Inset show th e
dark ﬁeld image of the particle. (e) Image of the second parti cle built from the
subtraction of images f and d. (f) Confocal scan of the dimer m arked with a
white box. Inset shown dark ﬁeld image of the same dimer. (g) Me asured values
of dexp. The mean value is ¯dexp = 501 nm± 10 nm.
printing of a second NP was attempted in a position with a given separation
distance from the already printed NP. The fabrication proces s consisted of the
following steps:
1. The stage was moved so as to center the laser focus onto one o f the NPs of
the grid.

--- PAGE 84 ---
6.1. Fabrication and characterization of dimers 83
2. (Optional) The focus lock routine was performed to compen sate any focus
drift. This routine consists of moving the stage to an empty r egion of
the substrate, ﬁnd the set-point of the focus, and returning t o the original
position.
3. A 2D confocal image of the NP was adquired from which its preci se location
was obtained by computing the center of mass. The stage is mov ed to assure
that the particle was centred with the printing beam.
4. Additional confocal scans were performed, which were subs equently used to
determine the separation distance between the two NPs of the d imer.
5. The stage was then shifted to place the laser focus at the tar get position for
the second NP d. Then the printing beam was unblocked until the second
NP was detected, or a previously set maximum time of seconds pa ssed
without detection of a second NP.
6. Confocal scans of the fabricated dimer were acquired.
The wavelength of the beams can be chosen independently for e ach scan or print-
ing procedure. The intensity was kept below the optical prin ting threshold during
scanning and focusing steps. Unless stated otherwise, light polarized perpendic-
ularly to the dimer axis was used, in order to avoid a scatteri ng signal from
electromagnetically coupled NPs.
The dimer fabrication process is schematically shown in ﬁgur e 6.1a. It shows
an array of isolated 60 nm Au NPs printed at λ = 532 nm and a laser power of
P = 1, 2 mW. Figure 6.1b. shows the same array after a second particle wa s
printed, with a set point of d = 500 nm. Confocal scans before (e.g. ﬁgure 6.1d)
and after (e.g. ﬁgure 6.1f) printing the second NP were acquir ed at λ = 532 nm
and P = 400 µW .
The production of dimers was characterized through the compa rison of two
magnitudes: i) The set-point d, deﬁned as the distance from the center of the ﬁrst
NP to the center of the laser focus, i.e., the target position to print the second
NP, and ii) The achieved interparticle distance dexp. This two magnitudes are
depicted on ﬁgure 6.1c.
For large separations, the interparticle distance dexp can be obtained directly
from the confocal scan of the fabricated dimer. However, for s eparations below the
diﬀraction limit, this is no longer possible. In that case, an image of the isolated

--- PAGE 85 ---
84 6. Connecting Metallic Nanoparticles by Optical Printing
second particle is created (see ﬁgure 6.1e), by subtracting the contribution of the
ﬁrst particle (acquired in step 4, ﬁgure 6.1d) to the image of the dimer (acquired
in step 6, ﬁgure 6.1f). With this procedure, the position of ea ch individual particle
NP can be retrieved and the interparticle distance dexp can be computed.
Figure 6.1g shows the measured values of dexp for each of the dimers shown
in ﬁgure 6.1b. Events where the second particle was not print ed or looked sig-
niﬁcantly diﬀerent (e.g. the reddish particle marked with a c ircle) were excluded
from the analysis. In this example, the average achieved int erparticle distance
was ¯dexp = 501 nm. The standard deviation was Sdexp = 41 nm, which is con-
sistent with the precision accuracy as described in chapter 5 . The error in the
determination of the mean value was ∆ dexp = Sd√
N = 10 nm.
In the following sections, this method or variations of this method are applied
to test the optical printing resolution for diﬀerent conﬁgu rations.
6.2 Limited lateral resolution in Au-Au homod-
imers
The ﬁrst step wards identifying the physical mechanism of th e repulsion causing
the limited resolution is to determine its range of action. F or that, dimers of 60
nm Au NPs were fabricated by optical printing at λ = 532 nm and a printing
power of P = 1, 2 mW, on top of a charged glass substrate prepared as described
in section 5.1. The choice of the power was based on results fr om section 5.3
because is the power for which optical printing provides the highest precision.
Various set-pointsd of interparticle separation distances were used, ranging f rom
800 to 60 nm. Figure 6.2a show example dark ﬁeld images of the fa bricated
dimers. Figure 6.2b shows the average achieved interparticl e distance dexp versus
the set-point d. For large separation distances ( > 300nm) the printing process
takes place smoothly, and the dimers can be fabricated accord ing to design. For
d< 300nm, a deviation from the set-point toward larger separat ions is observed,
concomitantly with a dramatic increase in the average waiti ng time for printing
(6.2c). Clearly, a repulsive interaction is preventing the second NP from being
printed correctly. For separations smaller than 250 nm the r epulsion is strong
enough to completely prevent the printing of the second part icle, and dimers
cannot be fabricated. At this condition no printing event wa s observed even for
waiting times 20-fold longer than the time needed to print at larger set-points.

--- PAGE 86 ---
6.2. Limited lateral resolution in Au-Au homodimers 85
500 400 300 250
d [ nm ]
5μm
Au-Au
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14Median Printing Time [seg]
d [nm]
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
dexp [nm]
d [nm]
(a)
(b) (c)
Figure 6.2: (a) Dark ﬁeld images of Au-Au dimers fabricated at di ﬀerent inter-
particle distances d. (b) Measured interparticle distances dexp vs set point d for
Au-Au dimers. The ideal behavior is shown as a line with slope = 1 ( c) Median
waiting time for the printing of the second particle in the di mer, as a function of
the distance to the ﬁrst particle d.
The three diﬀerent behaviors observed: no interaction, int eraction with print-
ing, and interaction without printing, are consistent with previous observations
with 200 nm Ag NPs by the group of Scherer[ 57], as discussed in section 3.3. The
value of 300 nm as a limit for controllably printing is also co nsistent with the
reported by the group of Feldmann.[ 63]
It is interesting to note that these limit distance values ar e comparable to
the laser beam waist at the focal plane w0 = (266± 3) nm. The parameter w0,
also called the Gaussian beam radius, represents the radius a t which the ﬁeld has
decreased to 1/e of its maximum, and the intensity has decreased to 1 /e 2. This
could indicate that the repulsion is light-induced and appea rs when the already

--- PAGE 87 ---
86 6. Connecting Metallic Nanoparticles by Optical Printing
printed particle is illuminated, as will be further discuss ed in next section.
6.3 Fabrication of Ag-Au heterodimers
Figure 6.3: (a) Extinction cross sections as a function of wave length calculated
using Mie theory for 60 nm Au (blue) and Ag (pink) NPs in water. Ver tical
lines show the printing wavelengths, at 405 nm and 532 nm. (b) Sc hematic of
the process for dimers fabrication: ﬁrst Ag NPs were optically printed with the
405 nm laser. Then the colloidal suspension is replaced by Au NP s, which are
subsequently printed using the 532 nm laser.
The results shown in section 6.2 make plausible that the repu lsive interaction
that prevents the fabrication of dimer at close separation is produced by light
interaction with the already printed NP. In this section expe riments designed to
test this hypothesis are presented, applying a printing str ategy that minimizes
light interaction with the NPs already present on the substrat e. The strategy
consist of fabricating heterodimers, printing ﬁrst a Ag NP, a nd then a Au NP
using light of 532 nm, as depicted in ﬁgure 6.3b. Figure 6.3a sh ow the extinction

--- PAGE 88 ---
6.3. Fabrication of Ag-Au heterodimers 87
cross section of 60 nm Au and Ag NPs , calculated using Mie theory. As can be
seen, Ag NPs are practically transparent at λ = 532 nm.
The protocol for fabrication and characterization of Ag-Au di mers was anal-
ogous to the one used for Au-Au dimers and described in section 6 .1. First a
grid of 60 nm Ag NPs was printed using the 405 nm laser. Then the co lloidal
suspension was exchanged for one of 60 nm Au NPs . Ag NPs were locali zed by
confocal scattering imaging at 405 nm and the Au NPs were printe d and detected
using the 532 nm laser.
λ= 532nm
 λ= 532nm
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
(e) (f)= (d) - (e)
dexp
λ= 405nm
Figure 6.4: Dark ﬁeld images of (a) Ag 60 nm NP and (b) Ag-Au dimer at
d = 200 nm with Ag NP on top. Confocal scattering images of (c) Ag NP
scanned with 532 nm laser. (d) heterodimer scanned with 532 n m laser (e) Ag
NP scanned with 405 nm laser (f) image obtained after subtract ing the signal
received by a single Ag NP (image (c)) to the dimer confocal scat tering at 532
nm (image (d)).
Determination of the achieved interparticle distance dexp is explained in ﬁgure
6.4. First, two confocal scattering images of the single Ag NP we re acquired, one
at 405 nm (ﬁgure 6.4e) and the other at 532 nm (ﬁgure 6.4c). The image at 405

--- PAGE 89 ---
88 6. Connecting Metallic Nanoparticles by Optical Printing
nm was used to locate the Ag particle. Then, after the Au NP was pri nted, a
confocal scattering image of the Ag-Au dimer was acquired at 53 2nm (ﬁgure 6.4d).
Both the Ag and Au NPs contributes to the signal. Subtracting the scattering
image of the Ag NP at 532 nm allows to obtain the image of the isola ted Au NP
(ﬁgure 6.4f). Comparison of images 6.4f and 6.4e provides th e measured dexp.
To justify this procedure, it must be remembered that, as disc ussed in section
4.1, elastic scattering from independent sources can inter fere at the detector. In
this way, intensity of the image 6.4c of the single Ag particle is proportional to
IAg∝|r +sAg|2 =|r|2 +|sAg|2 + 2|r||sAg|cosφAg (6.1)
whereφAg is the phase diﬀerence between the reﬂected |r| and the scattered|sAg|
light.
Then, the intensity of image 6.4d is proportional to
IAg−Au∝|r +sAg +sAu|2 =|r|2 +|sAg|2 + 2|r||sAg|cosφAg
+|sAu|2 + 2|r||sAu|cosφAu
+ 2|sAu||sAg|cos (kd +φAu−φAg)
(6.2)
Substracting 6.1 to 6.2
IF∝|sAu|2 + 2|r||sAu|cosφAu + 2|sAu||sAg|cos (kd +φAu−φAg) (6.3)
which gives the image shown in 6.4f. The ﬁrst two terms have a m aximum
at the Au NP position. The last term can be considered as an estim ation of
the error for the optical caracterization. In this case it ca n be neglected since
|sAg(532nm)|≪| sAu(532nm)|.
Ag-Au heterodimers were fabricated with various interparticl e separation dis-
tances, with at least 20 dimers for each distance. Figure 6.5a shows example
dark ﬁeld images of several Ag-Au dimers, when the separation i s smaller than
the diﬀraction limit ( < 300 nm) the heterodimers appear as a single object in
the dark-ﬁeld images. Nevertheless, the achieved interparti cle distance dexp could
be determined using the above described method. The average dexp is shown in
ﬁgure 6.5b, as a function of the target separation d. Remarkab ly, in this case
optical printing is possible for interparticle distances d all the way down to 60
nm for Ag-Au heterodimers, i.e. until the NPs are in contact.

--- PAGE 90 ---
6.3. Fabrication of Ag-Au heterodimers 89
(a) (b)
600 400 300 200 60
5μm Ag-Au
d [ nm ] 0 100 200 300 400 500 600
0
100
200
300
400
500
600 Au-Ag
Ag-Au
Y=X
dexp [nm]
d [nm]
Figure 6.5: (a) Dark ﬁeld images of Ag-Au dimers fabricated at di ﬀerent inter-
particle distances d. (b) Measured interparticle distances dexp vs set point d for
Ag-Au dimers (pink) and Au-Ag dimers (blue). The ideal behavior i s shown as
a line with slope = 1
In order to further characterize the fabricated heterodimer s and to corrobo-
rate the optical measurements of dexp, the dimers were visualized using a ﬁeld-
emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM). The achiev ed interparticle dis-
tance dSEM
exp measured with the (FE-SEM) was compared with its optical doptical
exp
counterpart through the calculus of Sdexp(d) =
√
⟨
(
dSEM
exp −doptical
exp
) 2
⟩ where the
average is over many dimers at the same set point d. For large set points, the
diﬀerence between two methods is small ( Sdexp(500 nm) = 20 nm) and increases
for closer set points (Sdexp(60 nm) = 50 nm). 15% of the fabricated Ag-Au dimers
were compared, and the average over all dimers and set points w asSdexp = 34 nm,
which is comparable to the radius of the particle. This means that the optical
measurement of dexp is an accurate method. Also, it indicates that particles are
strongly ﬁxed to the surface and do not move during rinsing of the sample with
water and drying in vacuum for SEM measurements.
For the fabrication of structures and circuits of NPs, is not o nly important
to control the interparticle distance and to be able to conne ct NPs, but also
to control the relative orientation of the printed NPs with r espect to the sub-
strate/device frame of reference. We interrogated the poss ibilities of optical
printing to fabricate Ag-Au dimers with controlled orientati on. For this, the
angleθ between the vertical axis (x) of the substrate and the vector deﬁned from
the centre of Ag NP to the centre of Au NP was analysed, as outlined i n the inset

--- PAGE 91 ---
90 6. Connecting Metallic Nanoparticles by Optical Printing
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 6.6: (a) Angle θ between the vertical axis (x) of the substrate and the
vector deﬁned from the center of Ag NP to the center of Au NP. The opt ical
measurement of θ corresponds to the mean values obtained from analysis of con -
focal scattering images of at least 20 dimers for each value o fd. Several values of
θ obtained from the analysis of FE-SEM images are shown for d = 500, 100, and
0 nm. (b,c) Dark ﬁeld (left) and FE-SEM (right) images of Ag-Au het erodimers
fabricated at d = 60 nm (b) and d = 0 nm (c). In (b) the Ag NPs is always the
one on the top.
of ﬁgure 6.6a. The same ﬁgure shows the mean values of θ for dimers fabricated
at various interparticle distances d ranging from 600 to 60 nm, obtained from
the analysis of confocal scattering images. As can be seen, th e optical printing is
accurate in terms of directionality within an error smaller t han 8 ◦ for all values
of d from 600 nm down to 100 nm. For the connected NPs ( d = 60 nm), the
variability takes a slightly higher value of 20 ◦. There are two possible reasons
for this increment. First, due to the limited printing accurac y, a larger variation
in θ is expected as d becomes shorter. Second, a contribution due to contact
interactions between the NPs is also likely.
As an example, Figure 6.6b shows dark-ﬁeld and FE-SEM images of ﬁve
connected Ag-Au NP dimers fabricated by setting the interparti cle distance to
60 nm. On the dark ﬁeld images the dimers appear as single diﬀra ction limited
scatterers. On the FE-SEM images the orientational control i s evident. Ag-Au
NP dimers can be fabricated as well if the interparticle dista nce is set to zero,
but the orientational control is completely lost (Figure 6.6 c).

--- PAGE 92 ---
6.4. Evaluation of scattering 91
An additional interesting experiment to test if the repulsio ns are light-induced
is to invert the order of fabrication of heterodimers. We print ed ﬁrst a Au NP at
532 nm and then a Ag NP at 405 nm. Following this order, the alrea dy printed
Au particle is not longer transparent to the printing wavelen gth of the second
particle, because Au extinction is not negligible at 405 nm (s ee ﬁgure 6.3). At
least 20 Au-Ag dimers were fabricated at each interparticle di stance d, and the
mean achieved distance dexp is shown in ﬁgure 6.5b (blue data). It is not possible
to connect the NPs with this printnig strategy. The minimum va lue of dexp was
250 nm, which is slightly smaller than for the Au-Au case.
Based on these results, and recalling that aside from their o ptical properties,
the Ag and Au NPs have practically identical physicochemical pr operties, such
as size, charge and surface capping molecules, it is reasona ble to conclude that
the repulsive interaction that prevents the fabrication of Au- Au and Au-Ag NP
dimers with separations smaller than 250 nm is light-induced . The experiments
also show that optical printing is capable of placing NPs at arb itrary separation
distances and also to connect them with controlled orientat ion, if the interaction
of the already printed NPs with the light used for printing is a voided. However,
nothing has been said about the causes of the light-induced re pulsion yet. In the
following sections, several mechanisms are proposed and ex perimentally tested.
6.4 Evaluation of scattering
Upon illumination, light scattered by the already printed NP may lead to disor-
tions of the optical force ﬁeld. It may shift the position of m aximum axial force
from the target position or may induce optical forces on othe r NPs in solution as
it happens in optical binding[ 73, 74, 65, 75]. During the optical printing process,
both the ﬁxed and the approaching particle polarizes, with a n induced dipole par-
allel to the electric ﬁeld. Considering than not only the far- ﬁeld but also the near
and intermediate ﬁelds produced by a radiating dipole depen d on the orientation
of the dipole, it is reasonable to expect that the interactio n between particles
varies with the polarization of light.
It is then interesting to calculate the optical force ﬁeld in t he presence of a
ﬁxed particle. This was done by a collaborator, Luk´ aˇ s Chv´ a tal, the Group of
Optical Micro-manipulation Techniques (OMITEC) at the Inst itute of Scientiﬁc
Instruments of the Czech Academy of Sciences (Brno, Czech Rep ublic), using

--- PAGE 93 ---
92 6. Connecting Metallic Nanoparticles by Optical Printing
F [ pN]
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
y [nm]
−300 −200 −100 0 100 200 300
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
z [nm]
(a)
(c)
z [nm]
y [nm]
−300 −200 −100 0 100 200 300
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0 0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
F [ pN]
E
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
y [nm]
−300 −200 −100 0 100 200 300
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
z [nm]
F [ pN]
E
y [nm]
−300 −200 −100 0 100 200 300
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
z [nm]
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
F [ pN]
E
y [nm]
−300 −200 −100 0 100 200 300
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
z [nm]
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
F [ pN]
E
(b)
(d) = (b) - (a) (f) = (c) - (a)
Figure 6.7: Optical force maps. (a) Total Force in the absence of any ﬁxed
particle. (b) Total force in the presence of a ﬁxed particle 200 nm away from the
beam centre, and a polarization perpendicular and (c) paral lel to the y axis. (d)
Estimation of the forces caused by the ﬁxed particle in a perp endicular polarized
beam, obtained by subtracting (b)-(a). (f) Estimation of th e forces caused by
the ﬁxed particle in a parallel polarized beam, obtained by s ubtracting (c)-(a).
In all cases, linearly polarized Gaussian beam of λ = 532 nm, with a waist of
w0 = 265 nm and power of P = 1, 2 mW was used, as in the experiments. White
areas correspond to inter-penetrated particles and were ex clueded from the map.
Calculus made by using Generalized Lorenz–Mie theory. Grey lines are ﬁeld lines.
The modulus of the force is colour coded. Data on this ﬁgure we re computed by
Luk´ aˇ s Chv´ atal from OMITEC.
their own code based on the Generalized Lorenz–Mie theory wit h an extension to
multiple spherical particles, as explained in reference [ 76]. First, the force map in
the absence of any ﬁxed particle was calculated for Au 60 nm NPs . Figure 6.7a
shows the total optical force ﬁeld for a Gaussian beam of λ = 532 nm, with
a waist of w0 = 265 nm and power of P = 1, 2 mW exerted on a Au 60 nm
NP. Grey lines indicate force ﬁeld lines, which according to t he discussion of
section 5.5.1 can be interpreted as trajectories for the par ticle being printed. The

--- PAGE 94 ---
6.4. Evaluation of scattering 93
force map is consistent with the obtained with the Rayleight a pproximation with
Kuwata polarizability (equations 1.30 and 1.31). For exampl e, the maximum
calculated forces are F = 0. 36 pN with Lorenz–Mie theory and F = 0. 31 pN
with Rayleight-Kuwata model. Then, the optical force ﬁelds in the presence of
a ﬁxed particle 200 nm away from the centre of the beam were cal culated for
both polarizations, corresponding to an experimental conﬁ guration where it was
impossible to print a second particle. Figure 6.7b and 6.7c sh ow the calculated
force ﬁeld for perpendicular and parallel polarizations, re spectively. In both cases,
there are many ﬁeld lines (trajectories) that end in the subs trate. For parallel
polarization there are lines that end close to the ﬁxed parti cle, indicating an
attractive interaction between particles. The inﬂuence of the ﬁxed particle in the
optical ﬁeld is therefore not strong enough to prevent the se cond particle from
reaching the surface. In order to better visualize it, the di ﬀerence between the
force ﬁelds in the presence and in the absence of a ﬁxed sphere is calculated.
The resulting subtraction can be interpreted as the distort ion of the force ﬁeld
produced by the ﬁxed sphere. This is shown in ﬁgure 6.7d for per pendicular and
6.7f for parallel polarization. Oscillations in the sign of the force are typical of
optical binding interactions. For both polarizations, the interaction force is at
least one order of magnitude weaker than the optical force exe rted by the laser
beam.
The eﬀect of the polarization of the printing beam in the fabr ication of Au
homodimers was also experimentally studied. The fabricati on procedure of sec-
tion 6.2 was repeated, for dimers oriented both parallel and perpendicular to the
electric ﬁeld of the printing beam and diﬀerent interpartic le distances d. Exam-
ple dark ﬁeld images of the dimers are shown in ﬁgure 6.8a. Figu re 6.8b shows
the average achieved interparticle distance dexp versus the set-point d. Remark-
ably, the results are independent of the orientation of the d imer. The distance d
for which printing becames impossible is the same in both cas es, as well as the
minimum achieved interparticle distance. Figure 6.8c shows the median waiting
time for the printing of the second particle, versus the set-p oint d. Again, similar
behaviours are obtained for both orientations. These resul ts indicate that the po-
larization of the beam does not have a major role in the light- induced repulsion.
The calculus of optical binding forces, together with the ex perimental obser-
vation that the optical printing process and its limitations a re independent of the

--- PAGE 95 ---
94 6. Connecting Metallic Nanoparticles by Optical Printing
Perpendicular Parallel
5μm
500 400 300 250
d [ nm ]
 d [ nm ]
500 400 300 250
E
(a)
(b) (c)
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800
0
5
10
15
20
Perpendicular
Parallel
Median Printing Time [seg]
d [nm]
dexp [nm]
Perpendicular
Y=X
Parallel
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
d [nm]
Figure 6.8: (a) Dark ﬁeld images of Au-Au dimers fabricated at di ﬀerent inter-
particle distances d and two orientations with respect to the polarization of the
printing beam. (b) Measured interparticle distances dexp vs set point d for Au-Au
dimers Parallel to the polarization (pink) and Perpendicul ar (blue). The ideal
behavior is shown as a line with slope = 1 (c) Median waiting tim e for the print-
ing of the second particle in the dimer, as a function of the di stance to the ﬁrst
particle d, for both orientations.
polarization of the beam, indicate that the light-induced r epulsions are not due
to optical binding interactions, or any other mechanism cau sed by scattering of
light by the printed particle. Therefore, other mechanisms based on absorption
of light must be studied, as discussed in the following secti on.
